Refactor the RBAC documentation for the plugin (#811)
pulp/pulp_container: docs/rbac/roles.rst

.. _roles:

Roles
=====

Role based access control (RBAC) is configured using access policies for the following endpoints:

* ``pulp_container/namespaces``
* ``distributions/container/container``
* ``repositories/container/container-push``
* ``remotes/container/container``
* ``repositories/container/container``
* ``repositories/container/container-push/versions``
* ``repositories/container/container/versions``
* ``content/container/blobs``
* ``content/container/manifests``
* ``content/container/tags``

Default Roles
-------------

> For each endpoint, there is defined a different set of roles. The roles can be assigned at the model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each endpoint, a different set of roles is defined. The roles can be assigned at the model
```

> or object level for every user or group. In the following sections, there are introduced *Creator*,
> *Owner*, *Consumer*, and *Collaborator* roles. The *Consumer* and *Collaborator* roles are defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or object level for every user or group. In the following sections, the *Creator*,
*Owner*, *Consumer*, and *Collaborator* roles are introduced. The *Consumer* and *Collaborator* roles are defined
```

only for namespaces and distributions (i.e., container repositories served by the Pulp Registry).

Creator Role
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *Creator* role contains the ``add`` permission for objects present on a particular endpoint.

> For the endpoint which hosts distributions, only users with the ``container.add_containerdistribution``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the distribution endpoint, only users with the ``container.add_containerdistribution``
```

      "pulp_created": "2022-05-26T12:02:28.872667Z",
      "name": "container.containerdistribution_creator",
      "description": null,
      "permissions": [
        "container.add_containerdistribution"
      ],
      "locked": true
    }

To perform operations on an endpoint (aka ViewSet actions), a user may need to have additional
permissions. One of the following *conditions* need to be satisfied to create a new distribution:

.. code-block:: bash

    pulp access-policy show --viewset-name "distributions/container/container" | jq -r '.statements[] | select(.action[] | contains("create"))'

::

    {
      "action": [
        "create"
      ],
      "effect": "allow",
      "condition": "has_namespace_model_perms",
      "principal": "authenticated"
    }
    {
      "action": [
        "create"
      ],
      "effect": "allow",
      "condition": "has_namespace_perms:container.add_containerdistribution",
      "principal": "authenticated"
    }
    {
      "action": [
        "create"
      ],
      "effect": "allow",
      "condition": "namespace_is_username",
      "principal": "authenticated"
    }

.. note::

>     A user, who has the *Creator* role for namespaces assigned, does not need to have any additional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A user with the *Creator* role for namespaces does not need to have any additional
```

    roles to create distributions within the given namespaces. Similarly, the user is allowed to create
    distributions within the owning username namespace (e.g., user ``alice`` can create container
    repositories like ``alice/repo1``).

Owner Role
~~~~~~~~~~

> The *Owner* role contains all of the permissions available for ViewSet's objects but the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Owner* role contains all of the permissions available for a ViewSet's objects but the
```

Author: I shall not use an indefinite article for plural forms.

Author: I am referring to `ViewSet's objects`. And, `objects` are in a plural form.

Reviewer 2: Hm. I believe that "a" does refer to "ViewSet" . If I use this alternate construction "...available to **the objects** of **a ViewSet**", does that make the difference clearer?

And as always, my apologies for English...

> ``add`` permission. For namespaces, the next set of permissions is considered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``add`` permission. For namespaces, the set of permissions reads:
```

        "container.namespace_pull_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_push_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_view_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_view_containerpushrepository",
        "container.view_containernamespace"
      ],
      "locked": true
    }

Besides the permissions for *Read*, *Update*, and *Delete* actions, the *Owner* role has the
``mange_roles`` permission that allows the user to call the ViewSet's ``add_role`` and
``remove_role`` endpoints for easy management of roles around that ViewSet's object.

The *Owner* role for namespaces contains permissions for any additional action that can be performed
on the related endpoints. The endpoints serving content for container clients permit access to
container distributions/repositories based on the presence of ``pull_containerdistribution`` and
``push_containerdistributuion`` permissions.

.. note::

    Repositories of the push type created with container clients (e.g., by running ``podman push``)
    are considered public and anyone can ``pull`` the images from them.

Consumer Role
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The *Consumer* role contains only the ``view`` and ``pull`` permissions. Below is showcased a list
> of associated permissions for distributions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Consumer* role contains only the ``view`` and ``pull`` permissions. Below, a list
of associated permissions for distributions is showcased:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    pulp role show --name "container.containerdistribution_consumer"

::

    {
      "pulp_href": "/pulp/api/v3/roles/7b97928a-5d33-454f-982e-41cfe102b273/",
      "pulp_created": "2022-05-26T12:02:28.945828Z",
      "name": "container.containerdistribution_consumer",
      "description": null,
      "permissions": [
        "container.pull_containerdistribution",
        "container.view_containerdistribution"
      ],
      "locked": true
    }

Having the ``view`` and ``pull`` permissions allows a user to see and pull content from the Pulp

> Registry. Assigning this role only at the object level allows administrators to select what the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Registry. Assigning this role only at the object level allows administrators and owners to select what the
```

user can see.

.. code-block:: bash

    pulp container distribution create --name foo --base-path bar
    pulp user create --username consumer
    pulp container distribution role add --name foo --user consumer --role "container.containerdistribution_consumer"
    pulp user role-assignment list --username consumer

::

    [
      {
        "pulp_href": "/pulp/api/v3/users/44/roles/6e58251d-7656-4c0d-9630-ea51ed7c29b5/",
        "pulp_created": "2022-05-27T15:27:00.623004Z",
        "role": "container.containerdistribution_consumer",
        "content_object": "/pulp/api/v3/distributions/container/container/5b8ec13c-d578-4b3a-9b99-80986e5e00b6/"
      }
    ]

Collaborator Role
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *Collaborator* role represents a set of permissions that a co-worker working within a same user-space

> should have. In comparison to the *Consumer* role, users with the *Collaborator* role are allowed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should have. In addition to the *Consumer* role, users with the *Collaborator* role are allowed
```

        "container.namespace_change_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_change_containerpushrepository",
        "container.namespace_delete_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_modify_content_containerpushrepository",
        "container.namespace_pull_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_push_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_view_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_view_containerpushrepository",
        "container.view_containernamespace"
      ],
      "locked": true
    }

Customizing Access Policies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The plugin is shipped with default access policies that can be modified to achieve different RBAC
behaviour. This can be done by issuing the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

    pulp role create --name "container.containerrepository_syncer" \
        --permission "container.view_containerrepository" \
        --permission "container.view_containerremote" \
        --permission "container.change_containerrepository" \
        --permission "container.modify_content_containerrepository" \
        --permission "container.sync_containerrepository"

>     pulp user role-assignment add --username "alice" --role "container.containerrepository_syncer" object ""

Reviewer: Should this be an example about changing the AP?

Author: Of course. I provide an example of how to create, assign, and hook a role.

For the sake of completeness, I will add an example of assigning default permissions to a user in one of the descriptions of the default roles.

Reviewer: I would still consider these two commands as an example to create and use a "custom role". "changing the access policy" to me is the next level of customization. My suggestion: Make this example its own thing, and move the headline for AP below it.

Reviewer: sounds good!

        "container.pull_containerdistribution",
        "container.push_containerdistribution",
        "container.view_containerdistribution"
      ],
      "locked": true
    }

.. code-block:: bash

    pulp role show --name "container.containernamespace_collaborator"

::

    {
      "pulp_href": "/pulp/api/v3/roles/1466e614-73a7-4a58-ab36-ced0ab1a1809/",
      "pulp_created": "2022-05-26T12:02:29.058226Z",
      "name": "container.containernamespace_collaborator",
      "description": null,
      "permissions": [
        "container.namespace_add_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_change_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_change_containerpushrepository",
        "container.namespace_delete_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_modify_content_containerpushrepository",
        "container.namespace_pull_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_push_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_view_containerdistribution",
        "container.namespace_view_containerpushrepository",
        "container.view_containernamespace"
      ],
      "locked": true
    }

Customizing Roles
-----------------

> In Pulp, users are allowed to create or update their roles. To create a role with permissions

Reviewer: Maybe this is admins...
